>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, JUNE 7...
PROTESTS AND POLITICS AS THE
WORLD'S G7 LEADERS MEET IN
GERMANY.
THE HIGH-STAKES ELECTION THAT
COULD TRIGGER UNPRECEDENTED
CHANGE IN TURKEY.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
THE BATTLE OVER THE USE OF
TRAFFIC CAMERAS.
>> IT'S ALL ABOUT REVENUE.
AND THAT'S NOT WHAT LAW
ENFORCEMENT IS SUPPOSED TO BE
ABOUT.
>> DO WE HAVE LESS FOLKS TRYING
TO BEAT THE YELLOW AND RUNNING
LIGHTS?
AND THE ANSWER TO THAT IS
ABSOLUTELY.
>> Stewart: NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALLISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
I'M ALISON STEWART IN FOR HARI
SREENIVASAN.
AT THE VERY START OF THE G7
SUMMIT, PRESIDENT OBAMA AND
GERMAN CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKEL
ANNOUNCED THEY'RE UNITED IN
STANDING UP TO RUSSIAN
AGGRESSION IN UKRAINE.
THE LEADERS AGREED TO CONTINUE
SANCTIONS AGAINST RUSSIA EVEN
THOUGH THE E.U. SANCTIONS EXPIRE
AT THE END OF JULY.
RUSSIAN PRESIDENT VLADIMIR
PUTIN WAS NOT INVITED TO THE
TWO-DAY SUMMIT IN THE BAVARIAN
ALPS.
LEADERS OF BRITAIN, FRANCE,
ITALY, CANADA AND JAPAN ARE
ATTENDING.
OUTSIDE THE SUMMIT, THOUSANDS OF
PROTESTERS MARCHED IN A NEARBY
TOWN, TOUCHING OFF ISOLATED
CLASHES WITH POLICE.
SO FAR, THE PROTESTS HAVE BEEN
FAR LESS VIOLENT THAN IN PAST
YEARS.
17,000 POLICE OFFICERS ARE
ASSIGNED TO CROWD CONTROL.
SO WHAT CAN WE EXPECT THE G-7 TO
ACCOMPLISH IN JUST TWO-DAY'S
TIME?
I'M JOINED VIA SKYPE BY WALL
STREET JOURNAL REPORTER ANTON
TROIANOVSKI WHO IS COVERING THE
SUMMIT IN GERMANY.
>> ONE OF THE TWO BIGGEST ISSUES
BEING DISCUSSED AT THE G7?
>> WELL, THERE'S A LOT OF
DIFFERENT THINGS ON THE AGENDA
BUT THE ISSUE LOOMING OVER ALL
OF THEM ARE GREECE AND RUSSIA.
GREECE AS YOU KNOW IS LOCKED
INTO THIS KIND OF SHOWDOWN TYPE
NEGOTIATION WITH ITS
INTERNATIONAL CREDITORS, THEY IS
DESPERATELY NEED BILLIONS OF
EUROS AND BAILOUT FUNDS BUT THE
NEGOTIATIONS BETWEEN THE
CREDITORS AND GREECE REMAIN VERY
TENSE.
AND ON RUSSIA, PRESIDENT OBAMA
LANDED HERE THIS MORNING WITH
THE GOAL OF MAKING SURE THAT THE
EUROPEANS ARE UNITED BEHIND
MAINTAINING SANCTIONS AGAINST
RUSSIA.
AS LONG AS THE VIOLENCE IN
UKRAINE CONTINUES.
AND FROM THERE IT APPEARS THAT
THAT IS GOING TO HAPPEN.
>> WHAT HAS BEEN THE IMPACT OF A
PUTIN-LESS SUMMIT?
WHAT HAS HIS ABSENCE MEANT?
>> IT SHOWS THIS NEW DIVISION
THAT WE'RE SEEING IN THE WORLD,
THIS ISSUE THAT A LOT OF PEOPLE
ARE REFERRING TO AS A NEW COLD
WAR.
CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKEL IN
GERMANY WHO IS HOSTING THIS
SUMMIT HAS COME UNDER A LOT OF
CRITICISM THAT PUTIN IS
SECLUDED.
THEY ARE SAYING, HOW CAN YOU
SOLVE INTERNATIONAL ISSUES
WITHOUT PUTIN AT THE TABLE?
HER RESPONSE IS THAT THE GROUP
OF 7 IS NOT JUST AN ECONOMIC
GROUP OR POLITICAL GROUP BUT
IT'S ALSO A GROUP OF DEMOCRACIES
WITH SHARED VALUES.
>> ANGELA MERKEL, CHANCELLOR
MERKEL IS A FAIRLY WELCOMING
PERSONALITY TO OBAMA.
HOW WOULD YOU ACCESSORY THAT
RELATIONSHIP NOW?
>> THE REFERENCES TODAY WAS VERY
OBLIQUE AS THE THING USUALLY IS
WITH ANGELA MERKEL.
SHE DID MENTION BASICALLY THAT
DESPITE SOME DIFFERENCES OF
OPINION BETWEEN GERMANY AND THE
UNITED STATES, THE ALLIANCE
STAYED STRONG.
THE U.S. AND BERLIN HAVE
MAINTAINED A UNITED FRONT BY AND
LARGE IN CONFRONTING MOSCOW OVER
UKRAINE.
MERKEL HAS LED THE EUROPEAN
SANCTIONS PUSH AGAINST RUSSIA.
THE EUROPEAN DIPLOMATIC PUSH
WITH RUSSIA, THAT APPEARS TO BE
WORKING AND YOU COULD CERTAINLY
TELL WHEN OBAMA MET MERKEL TODAY
ON THIS TOWN SQUARE, NEAR THE
RESORT WHERE THEY'RE MEETING,
SHE REALLY WENT ALL OUT TO SAY
THAT THE WAY HE PUT IT, THE U.S.
GERMAN ALLIANCE WAS ONE OF THE
STRONGEST THE WORLD HAS EVER
SEEN.
>> WE SHOULD MENTION OF COURSE
THERE HAVE BEEN THOUSANDS OF
PROTESTERS AT THIS G7 SUMMIT.
WHAT IS IT THAT THEY ARE
PROTESTING, WHAT IS THE MOST
IMPORTANT THING TO THE
ACTIVISTS?
>> IT IS PROBABLY THE
TRANSATLANTIC TRADE AGREEMENT
THAT THE U.S. AND THE PACIFIC
PARTNERS ARE NEGOTIATING NOW.
LOWERING PROTECTIONS IN GERMANY,
BRINGING AMERICAN COWBOY
CAPITALISM IN EUROPE.
THERE IS A FAIR AMOUNT OF
OPPOSITION TO THAT THIS YEAR,
TRADE IS TO BE DISCUSSED AT G7,
TTIP IS ONE OF THE MAIN ECONOMIC
GOALS THAT MERKEL HAS OVER THE
NEXT COUPLE OF YEARS, CLIMATE
POLICY IS ALSO AN ISSUE, AHEAD
OF THE CLIMATE CONFERENCE IN
PARIS LATER ON THIS YEAR.
IT'S BEEN QUITE PEACEFUL
COMPARED TO SOME OF THE PAST
G-8 CONFERENCES.
>> OFFICIALS SUSPECT CHINESE
HACKERS ACCESSED THE BE RECORDS
OF CURRENT AND FEDERAL
EMPLOYEES, HOPING TO FIND AND
POTENTIALLY LOCATE SPIES WITHIN
THE U.S. GOVERNMENT.
>>
>> NOTHING SHOULD BE TELEGRAPHED
IN ADVANCE, NOTHING SHOULD BE
GIVEN AS FAR AS NOTICE BUT I
THINK THESE COUNTRIES OR THESE
TERRORIST GROUPS SHOULD KNOW
THAT THERE WILL BE CONSEQUENCES
WHEN THEY ACT THIS WAY.
>> Stewart: SENATOR AND
REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATE LINDSEY GRAHAM TOLD
CNN'S "STATE OF THE UNION" THAT
WE COULD BE FACING A SERIOUS
THREAT UNLESS THE GOVERNMENT
BEEFS UP CYBER SECURITY.
>> YOU GOTTA HAVE MORE MONEY.
YOU GOT TO SET-ASIDE THESE
BUDGET CUTS FOR DEFENSE AND NON-
DEFENSE REPLENISH OUR MILITARY;
UP OUR GAME ON THE INTEL SIDE.
>> Stewart: IN THE
MEDITERRANEAN, CREWS HAVE
LAUNCHED A NEW WAVE OF RESCUE
MISSIONS TO SAVE HUNDREDS OF
MIGRANTS STILL STRANDED AT SEA.
AUTHORITIES SAY AS MANY AS TEN
DIFFERENT BOATS CALLED FOR HELP
THIS MORNING.
MORE THAN 80,000 PEOPLE HAVE
EITHER BEEN RESCUED OR SAILED TO
SAFETY THIS YEAR.
MOST ARE PAYING SMUGGLERS TO
BOARD WOODEN OR RUBBER BOATS IN
A DESPERATE ATTEMPT TO FLEE
PERSECUTION AND VIOLENCE IN
LIBYA AND SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA.
WHILE BRITISH, SWEDISH, SPANISH
AND ITALIAN SHIPS ARE RACING TO
SAVE THE STRANDED MIGRANTS, THE
E.U. IS STILL DEBATING HOW TO
HANDLE TO INFLUX OF REFUGEES
ONCE THEY COME ASHORE.
AN INTERESTING TURN OF EVENTS IN
TURKEY'S PARLIAMENTARY ELECTION:
THE RULING PARTY WAS FAVORED TO
WIN BIG, BUT EARLY RESULTS SHOW
IT COULD END UP LOSING ITS
MAJORITY ALTOGETHER.
PRESIDENT RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN
ASKED THE COUNTRY'S 53 MILLION
ELIGIBLE VOTERS TO GIVE HIS
PARTY 400 PARLIAMENTARY SEATS.
THAT WOULD HAVE CREATED A SUPER
MAJORITY THAT COULD REWRITE THE
CONSTITUTION AND GIVE THE
PRESIDENCY UNPRECEDENTED NEW
POWERS.
THE ELECTION'S CREATED REAL
TENSION IN THE STREETS.
BOMBS EXPLODED AT A RALLY FOR A
RIVAL PARTY FRIDAY, KILLING TWO
AND WOUNDING AT LEAST 200.
JOINING ME TO HELP ANALYZE THESE
EARLY RESULTS IS STEVEN COOK,
SENIOR FELLOW FOR MIDDLE EASTERN
STUDIES AT THE COUNCIL ON
FOREIGN RELATIONS.
IS-K FOR, STEVEN BEFORE WE GO
INTO THE WEEDS ON THE RESULTS I
WANT TO STEP BACK AND SET THE
THE SCENE FOR PEOPLE.
WHY WAS SELECTION SO IMPORTANT?
WHY WAS THE WORLD WATCHING?
>> WELL, THIS WAS AN IMPORTANT
ELECTION BECAUSE, ONE, PRESIDENT
ERDOGAN WHO HAD BEEN PRIME
MINISTER FOR THE PREVIOUS 12
YEARS HAD WANTED TO CHANGE THE
POLITICAL SYSTEM FROM A HYBRID
PRESIDENTIAL PARLIAMENTARY
SYSTEM TO A PURELY PRESIDENTIAL
SYSTEM.
WHICH MEANS ALL THE POWER IN THE
POLITICAL SYSTEM WOULD FLOW TO
HIM.
AT THE MOMENT IT'S THE PRIME
MINISTER WHO IS THE PRIMARY
ACTOR IN THE SYSTEM.
UNDER THE PRESIDENTIAL SYSTEM HE
WOULD HAVE ALL THE EXECUTIVE
POWER.
THE SECOND REASON IT WAS SO
POWER IS A KURDISH POLITICAL
PARTY WAS POISED AND HAS IN FACT
TURKEY'S VERY HIGH THRESHOLD FOR
GETTING INTO THE PARLIAMENT.
THEY HAVE NOW GOTTEN ABOUT 11%
OF THE POPULAR VOTE WHICH MEANS
FOR FIRST TIME A KURDISH BASED
PARTY WILL BE A MAJOR FACTOR IN
TURKISH POLITICS.
>> AND WHAT IMPACT WILL THAT
HAVE ON THE WAY TURKEY'S
GOVERNED GOING FORWARD?
>> UP TO THIS POINT GOING BACK
TO 2002 WHEN THE PARTY FIRST
CAME TO POWER, THEY HAVE NOT HAD
TO SHARE, THEY HAVE RULED
ESSENTIALLY ALONE WITH VERY FEW
CHECKS AND BALANCES I MIGHT ADD.
NOW THEY WILL HAVE TO GO INTO
COALITION WITH ANOTHER PARTY.
IT LOOKS LIKE THERE WILL
LIKELY -- AT LEAST INITIAL
DISCUSSIONS BETWEEN THE JUSTICE
AND DEVELOPMENT PARTY AND THE
NATIONAL MOVEMENT PARTY, A PART
WITH WHICH THE JUSTICE AND
DEVELOPMENT PARTY HAS SHARED A
CONSTITUENCY AND THEY HAVE
WORKED TOGETHER.
THAT WOULD BE THE MOST LIKELY
COALITION GOING FORWARD.
>> OBVIOUSLY ITS CLOAKS
LOCATION, SHARE NO BORDERS WITH
SYRIA AND IRAQ.
TELL US WHO THE PLAYERS ARE WHO
WILL BE SHARING THE RESULTS?
>> THE SYRIAN OPPOSITION, THE
IRAQI GOVERNMENT, THE EGYPTIAN
GOVERNMENT, THE ISRAELI
GOVERNMENT AND ALL OF THE
GOVERNMENTS IN THE PERSIAN GULF.
>> EVERYBODY IS WHAT YOU'RE
TELLING ME.
>> THE ENTIRE REGION.
IT GOES TO SHOW HOW
STRATEGICALLY IMPORTANT TURKEY
IS TO VIRTUALLY EVERY CONFLICT
IN THE REGION IN THE MOMENT.
THERE HAS BEEN A SIGNIFICANT
DISCONNECT BETWEEN WASHINGTON
AND ANKARA THE WAY IT
APPROACHES THE CONFLICT IN IRAQ
WITH I.S.I.S. AND HOW TO DEAL
WITH THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR.
THE TURKISH POSITION HAS BEEN
THE BEST WAY TO DEAL WITH THE
SO-CALLED ISLAMIC STATE IS TO
BRING DOWN THE TURKISH REGIME.
98 PUT A VOID ON THE EFFORT ON
THE PART OF THE TURKS TO FUND
AND COORDINATE DIFFERENT
EXTREMIST GROUPS TO TAKE ON THE
ASSAD REGIME.
THERE MAY BE CHANGES IN THE
APPROACH BUT OVERALL I THINK
TURKISH FOREIGN POLICY WILL
REMAIN LARGELY THE SAME.
>> IN READING THE WIRES AND
TWITTER IT SEEMS THIS POTENTIAL
OUTCOME WAS UNEXPECTED.
>> WELL, THERE WERE A LOT OF
DIFFERENT EXPECTATIONS GOING
FORWARD.
I SHOULD SAY THERE WERE A LOT OF
DIFFERENT EXPECTATIONS IN THE
LAST FEW WEEKS.
NO ONE CAN REALLY TRUST THE
POLLING THAT WAS DONE AHEAD OF
THE ELECTIONS.
EVERYONE CERTAINLY EXPECTED THE
JUSTICE AND DEVELOPMENT PARTY TO
DO QUITE WELL AND THEY HAVE DONE
QUITE WELL BY ANY STANDARDS
OTHER THAN THEIR OWN PAST
SUCCESS, HAVING 40% OF THE
POPULAR VOTE IS A VERY
SUCCESSFUL PARTY.
BUT THE -- POLITICAL PARTY.
BUT KURDISH PARTY GETTING LESS
THAN 11% OF THE POPULAR VOTE,
IT WILL HAVE LESS POWER THAN
SINCE IT HAS GOTTEN SINCE
2002.
BUT THERE ARE CERTAIN RULING IN
A THUGGISH WAY OVER THE COURSE
OF THE LAST FOUR OR FIVE YEARS,
AND MANY TURKS RESENT THAT KIND
OF ARROGANCE OF POWER.
>> STEVEN COOK FROM THE COUNCIL
OF FOREIGN RELATIONS, THANKS FOR
WALKING US THROUGH THE TURKISH
RELATIONS.
NEW DETAILS
>> Stewart: NEW DETAILS TONIGHT
ON ALLEGED CORRUPTION AT FIFA,
THE B.B.C. REPORTS IT HAS TRACED
A $10 MILLION BRIBE FROM THE
ASSOCIATION TO AN OFFICIAL.
THE MONEY WAS REPORTEDLY SENT
FROM FIFA ON BEHALF OF SOUTH
AFRICA TO FUND A CARIBBEAN
SOCCER PROGRAM.
BUT THE B.B.C. REPORTS THE CASH
ACTUALLY APPEARED IN ACCOUNTS
CONTROLLED BY FIFA'S THEN-VICE
PRESIDENT, JACK WARNER.
WARNER IS ONE OF 14 PEOPLE U.S.
PROSECUTORS HAVE CHARGED WITH
CORRUPTION AT FIFA.
WARNER DENIES ALL CLAIMS OF
WRONGDOING.
THE DEFENSE DEPARTMENT IS
AWARDING TWO-MILLION DOLLARS TO
A SOUTH KOREAN ROBOTICS TEAM IN
THE "DARPA ROBOTICS CHALLENGE"
WHICH TOOK PLACE IN CALIFORNIA
THIS WEEKEND.
THE D.O.D. CHALLENGED INVENTORS
TO CREATE A ROBOT ABLE TO AID
HUMANS IN A DISASTER.
THE COMPETITION WAS LAUNCHED
AFTER A TSUNAMI STRUCK JAPAN IN
2011.
THE WINNING BOT ACCOMPLISHED
EIGHT TASKS IN FEWER THAN 45
MINUTES, INCLUDING DRIVING A
VEHICLE, CUTTING A HOLE IN A
WALL, WALKING OVER RUBBLE, AND
CLIMBING STAIRS.
AND NOW TO OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT
AND THE NATIONWIDE DEBATE ABOUT
THE USE OF TRAFFIC CAMERAS.
NEARLY 500 COMMUNITIES ACROSS
THE COUNTRY USE THEM IN AN
EFFORT TO SLOW DOWN DRIVERS AND
SAVE LIVES.
BUT AT LEAST EIGHT STATES HAVE
BANNED THEIR USE, BELIEVING THE
TECHNOLOGY VIOLATES DRIVERS'
RIGHTS AND IS BEING USED
PRIMARILY TO RAISE REVENUE.
THE BATTLE IS NOW PLAYING OUT IN
OHIO.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
RICK KARR UPDATES OUR STORY
WHICH ORIGINALLY AIRED LAST
YEAR.
LIGHTS KILL NEARLY SEVEN HUNDRED
>> Reporter: DRIVERS WHO RUN RED
PEOPLE EVERY YEAR NATIONWIDE.
SUE AND PAUL OBERHAUSER REFUSE
TO CALL THOSE CRASHES"
ACCIDENTS."
>> MOST OF THOSE ARE
INTENTIONALLY PEOPLE THINK THEY
GONNA GET AWAY WITH IT AND THEY
RUN THE RED LIGHT.
THEY NEVER THINK THEY'RE GONNA
KILL A PERSON.
>> Reporter: THEIR DAUGHTER
SARAH WAS KILLED BY A DRIVER WHO
RAN A RED LIGHT IN 2002.
SHE WAS THIRTY-ONE YEARS OLD AND
A MOTHER OF TWO, A HIGH-SCHOOL
CHEMISTRY TEACHER AND BASKETBALL
COACH IN OXFORD, OHIO.
SHE WAS ON HER WAY TO A TEACHER-
TRAINING WORKSHOP ON A SATURDAY
MORNING WHEN HER LIGHT TURNED
GREEN.
>> THERE WAS A YOUNG MAN WHO WAS
21 YEARS OLD.
AND HE RAN THE RED LIGHT GOING
55 MILES AN HOUR.
AND HE T-BONED HER CAR AND SARAH
WAS KILLED INSTANTLY.
>> Reporter: THE OBERHAUSERS
BELIEVE THERE'S A WAY TO PREVENT
CRASHES LIKE THE ONE THAT KILLED
THEIR DAUGHTER: AUTOMATED
CAMERAS THAT KEEP AN EYE ON
INTERSECTIONS 24-7.
SO EVEN WHEN POLICE AREN'T
THERE, DRIVERS THINK TWICE
BEFORE RUNNING A LIGHT.
AND THE PROOF THAT THEY WORK,
ACCORDING TO THE OBERHAUSERS, IS
A FORTY-MINUTE DRIVE FROM THEIR
FARMHOUSE IN OHIO'S STATE
CAPITAL.
THE CITY OF COLUMBUS INSTALLED
ITS FIRST RED-LIGHT CAMERA AT
THIS INTERSECTION IN 2006.
SINCE THEN, IT'S PUT CAMERAS AT
MORE THAN THREE DOZEN OTHER
INTERSECTIONS.
AND AT LOCATIONS WITH CAMERAS,
RIGHT-ANGLE CRASHES FELL 74%
BETWEEN 2005 AND 2008.
>> WE HAVE SIGNIFICANTLY ALTERED
DRIVER BEHAVIOR FOR THE GOOD
HERE IN COLUMBUS, OHIO.
>> Reporter: GEORGE SPEAKS IS
THE CITY'S PUBLIC SAFETY
DIRECTOR, AND A RED-LIGHT CAMERA
EVANGELIST.
>> DO WE HAVE LESS FOLKS TRYING
TO BEAT THE YELLOW AND RUNNING
LIGHTS?
AND THE ANSWER TO THAT IS,
ABSOLUTELY.
WE HAVE OVER 70% LESS CITATIONS
THAN WE USED TO.
>> Reporter: COLUMBUS DRIVERS
HAVEN'T TURNED INTO ANGELS.
BUT WHEN ONE DOES RUN A RED
LIGHT AT AN INTERSECTION WITH
CAMERAS, IT'S CAPTURED IN A
TWELVE-SECOND VIDEO CLIP.
>> YOU'LL NOTE THAT THE RED
LIGHT HAS BEEN RED FOR A NUMBER
OF SECONDS, PRIOR TO THE CAR
COMING INTO THE INTERSECTION.
IT'S BEEN RED NOW FOR WHAT,
3,000, 4,000 AND THE DRIVER,
JEOPARDIZING EVERYONE
>> Reporter: THE CAMERAS SEND
THOSE VIDEOS, AND HIGH-
RESOLUTION PHOTOS OF THE
VEHICLES FROM BEHIND, TO A
PRIVATE CONTRACTOR.
IT IDENTIFIES WHO OWNS THE CAR
AND SENDS THAT INFORMATION BACK
TO THE COLUMBUS POLICE
DEPARTMENT.
THERE, COPS LIKE LIEUTENANT
BRENT MULL REVIEW THE EVIDENCE.
>> IS HE SAFE?
RIGHT THERE.
I'M GOING TO SAY HE MADE A SAFE
TURN.
HE DID LOOK, HE WAS IN CONTROL
OF HIS VEHICLE, THERE WAS NO
PEDESTRIANS, AND NO OTHER CROSS
VEHICULAR TRAFFIC.
I'M GOING TO REJECT THAT.
THIS IS FOR SAFETY.
IT'S NOT ABOUT REVENUE FOR ME.
>> Reporter: THE PRIVATE
CONTRACTOR MAILS CITATIONS TO
DRIVERS WHO CAN PAY THE NINETY
FIVE DOLLAR FINE OR REQUEST A
HEARING.
THE CONTRACTOR PROCESSES THE
FINES, AND GETS TO KEEP ABOUT
30%.
>> FOR A GOVERNMENT ENTITY, IT
IS ZERO DOLLARS TO SET UP.
THE COMPANY UP-FRONTS ALL THE
MONEY.
IN EXCHANGE, THEY RECEIVE A
PERCENTAGE.
IT ALLOWS US AS A DIVISION OF
POLICE TO CONCENTRATE, QUITE
FRANKLY, ON MORE VIOLENT CRIME.
>> Reporter: STUDIES OF RED-
LIGHT CAMERAS EFFECT ON CRASHES
AREN'T CONCLUSIVE.
MOST EVIDENCE SHOWS THAT THEY
CUT DOWN ON RIGHT ANGLE CRASHES,
WHICH TEND TO BE SEVERE.
BUT SOME RESEARCH SHOWS THAT
THEY MAY LEAD TO MORE CRASHES
OVERALL, BECAUSE DRIVERS WHO
SLAM ON THE BRAKES TO AVOID
RUNNING LIGHTS MAY BE GETTING
INTO MORE REAR-END COLLISIONS.
EITHER WAY, A LOT OF MOTORISTS
JUST DON'T LIKE TRAFFIC CAMERAS.
>> THIS IS PROBABLY THE MOST
CONTROVERSIAL SUBJECT MATTER
I'VE EVER DEALT WITH IN MY 20-
PLUS YEARS OF EXPERIENCE IN
GOVERNMENT.
>> Reporter: BUT AUTOMATED
CAMERAS DON'T JUST WATCH OUT FOR
RED-LIGHT RUNNERS, THEY'RE ALSO
USED TO NAB SPEEDERS.
>> COMMUNITIES, SOME
COMMUNITIES, HAVE QUITE FRANKLY
USED THESE AS SPEED TRAPS.
>> Reporter: SPEED CAMERAS NEED
TO BE CALIBRATED REGULARLY AND
THE VIDEO THEY CAPTURE JUST SHOW
CARS DRIVING AWAY, WHICH ISN'T
AS CONVINCING AS AN IMAGE OF A
LIGHT THAT'S RED.
COLUMBUS HAS ONLY USED SPEED
CAMERAS IN SCHOOL ZONES, WHEN A
COP IS PRESENT.
BUT OTHER OHIO MUNICIPALITIES
HAVE DEPLOYED THEM MORE
AGGRESSIVELY.
LIKE ELMWOOD PLACE, JUST OUTSIDE
CINCINNATI.
THERE'S ONE MAIN DRAG THROUGH
THE TOWN AND THE POLICE CHIEF
HAS SAID DRIVERS USED TO FLY
THROUGH HERE.
BUT HE DIDN'T HAVE THE OFFICERS
TO ISSUE TICKETS, SO AFTER A
COUPLE ACCIDENTS, THE TOWN
DECIDED TO INSTALL SOME
AUTOMATED SPEED ENFORCEMENT
CAMERAS.
WITHIN A FEW MONTHS, THAT HAD
LED TO THOUSANDS OF CITATIONS
AND HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF
DOLLARS IN FINES.
MOTORISTS FILED A CLASS ACTION
LAWSUIT, ARGUING THAT THOSE
FINES VIOLATED THEIR DUE-PROCESS
RIGHTS.
>> Reporter: MICHAEL ALLEN IS A
FORMER PROSECUTOR AND MUNICIPAL
JUDGE IN CINCINNATI AND THE
LAWYER WHO REPRESENTED THOSE
DRIVERS.
>> YOU KNOW, WHEN SOMEBODY
CHALLENGES A SPEEDING CITATION,
WHICH RARELY HAPPENS, BUT IF IT
DOES, THAT POLICE OFFICER HAS TO
RAISE HIS RIGHT ARM AND TESTIFY
THAT THE DEVICE HE USED, THE
LASER RADAR WAS PROPERLY
CALIBRATED, THAT HE IS PROPERLY
TRAINED, THAT HE IS CERTAIN THAT
THE PERSON THAT IS CHARGED IS
THE PERSON THAT WAS DRIVING THAT
VEHICLE.
YOU DON'T HAVE THESE IN THE
SPEED CAMERA CASES.
>> Reporter: A COUNTY JUDGE
AGREED, HE CALLED THE CAMERAS "A
HIGH-TECH GAME OF THREE CARD
MONTY, A SCAM THAT THE MOTORISTS
CAN'T WIN" AND ORDERED ELMWOOD
PLACE TO REMOVE THE CAMERAS.
AND PAY BACK THE FINES.
AND GENERATING INCOME FROM THOSE
FINES WAS WHY THE VILLAGE
INSTALLED CAMERAS IN THE FIRST
PLACE, ACCORDING TO ALLEN.
>> IT'S ALL ABOUT REVENUE.
YOU'RE SEEING A TREND IN THIS
COUNTRY TOWARDS POLICING FOR
PROFIT.
AND THAT'S NOT WHAT LAW
ENFORCEMENT IS SUPPOSED TO BE
ABOUT.
>> Reporter: WE SAT DOWN WITH
THE OBERHAUSERS.
THEIR DAUGHTER WAS KILLED IN A
SIDE-ON COLLISION.
COULD YOU LOOK AT THEM AND MAKE
A DUE PROCESS ARGUMENT TO PEOPLE
WHO ARE GRIEVED THAT THEIR ADULT
DAUGHTER WAS KILLED?
>> I THINK I COULD.
I WOULD DO IT VERY RESPECTFULLY,
THOUGH, YOU SEE SO MANY TIMES IN
THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
WHERE YOU HAVE THE FAMILIES, OF
PEOPLE THAT HAVE SUFFERED
HORRIBLE TRAGEDIES, AND
LEGISLATORS WILL RUSH TO CHANGE
LAWS BECAUSE OF THAT.
AND AT THE END OF THE DAY, THOSE
LAWS ACTUALLY ARE COUNTER-
PRODUCTIVE AND CONTRARY TO DUE
PROCESS.
>> Reporter: IN DECEMBER, ALLEN
WATCHED GOVERNOR JOHN KASICH
SIGN A LAW THAT EFFECTIVELY BANS
AUTOMATIC ENFORCEMENT CAMERAS.
IT REQUIRES A LAW ENFORCEMENT
OFFICER TO BE "PRESENT AT THE
LOCATION OF THE DEVICE AT ALL
TIMES DURING THE OPERATION OF
THE DEVICE."
MUNICIPALITIES SAID THAT DEFEATS
THE PURPOSE OF THE CAMERAS AND
MAKES THEM TOO EXPENSIVE TO USE.
COLUMBUS OFFICIALS ARGUED THAT
COMPLYING WITH THE LAW WOULD
COST THE CITY MORE THAN TWELVE
MILLION DOLLARS A YEAR.
IT'S ONE OF AT LEAST FIVE
MUNICIPALITIES THAT HAVE FILED
LAWSUITS ARGUING THAT THE CAMERA
LAW VIOLATES OHIO'S STATE
CONSTITUTION AND SHOULD BE
OVERTURNED.
JUDGES IN SEVERAL COUNTIES
ISSUED STAYS THAT ALLOWED
CITIES, LIKE DAYTON, TO KEEP
USING THEIR TRAFFIC CAMERAS.
BUT THEY'VE BEEN TURNED OFF IN
MUCH OF THE STATE, INCLUDING
COLUMBUS.
CAMERA ADVOCATES PAUL AND SUE
OBERHAUSER SAY THEY'RE SAD AND
DISAPPOINTED THE BILL PASSED AND
HOPE OHIO COURTS OVERTURN IT.
THEY'VE CONTINUED THEIR FIGHT IN
OTHER STATES CONSIDERING
LEGISLATION THAT WOULD CURTAIL
AUTOMATIC ENFORCEMENT CAMERAS.
>> I'M PAUL OBERHAUSER AND
ACTUALLY I'M HERE WITH MY WIFE
SUE.
>> Reporter: THEY'RE CO-CHAIRS
OF A PRO-CAMERA GROUP THAT'S
PARTIALLY FUNDED BY CAMERA
COMPANIES.
BUT THEY ARGUE THAT SUPPORT
HASN'T CHANGED THEIR MESSAGE ONE
BIT.
>> WE'RE NOT RICH.
WE CAN'T GO OUT AND FUND OUR
MESSAGE.
AND, WHAT BEING WITH THE
COALITION HAS DONE IS IT'S GIVEN
US THE ABILITY TO ACCESS DATA
FROM ALL OVER THE COUNTRY.
>> YOU KNOW, LAST YEAR WE KILLED
ALMOST 700 PEOPLE RUNNING RED
LIGHTS, INNOCENT PEOPLE ONE AT A
TIME AND NOBODY WANTS TO DO
ANYTHING ABOUT IT.
>> Reporter: THE FATE OF
AUTOMATIC ENFORCEMENT CAMERAS IN
OHIO IS LIKELY TO BE DECIDED BY
THE STATE'S SUPREME COURT.
RIGHT NOW, LISTEN TO OUR SPOTIFY
PLAYLIST, FEATURING SOME OF
THE NOMINEES IN TONIGHT'S TONY
AWARDS.
VISIT PBS.ORG/NEWSHOUR.
TO RECAP, THE G7 MEETING
CONTINUES IN GERMANY AND EARLY
ELECTIONS SHOW TURKEY RULING
PARTY HAS LOST ITS MAJORITY IN
PARLIAMENT.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
GOOD NIGHT.